---
title: "Road Crack Image Segmentation"
excerpt: "The project is aimed to develop a unet-based model to detect road cracks"
collection: portfolio
---

Description
-------
Road crack detection is an important task in infrastructure maintenance and safety. Detecting cracks in roads helps identify areas that need repair and ensures road safety. Automatic crack detection is always a challenging task due to the inherent complex backgrounds, uneven illumination, irregular patterns, and various types of noise interference. This study proposes an effective, fully connected network, that replaced pooling operation with discrete wavelet transformation and uses a self-attention mechanism to capture contextual information effectively. The model has led to an increase in Test F1-score by 0.4 as compared to a normal ResNet model.

Image classification has a rich history that has continued for decades. Computer vision began with edge detection via matrices of particular values that would yield images with similar patterns given the filter. The similarity in patterns was exploited for classification tasks. Eventually, neural networks started to develop their own filters which were usually black box parameters with the ability to classify images. Traditional neural nets were improved when convolution neural nets (CNN) stepped in to tackle image classification. It continues to be state of the art with more scientists adding layers and finding tricks to bring solutions to the vanishing gradient within deep layered models. Although concrete crack images can come from large datasets, which would generally capture a multitude of conditions, crack detection shares the high noise seen in medical imaging modalities along with the potential of the classification of images relying on limited pixels, or fine detail.

U-Net models have skipped connections between encoder and decoder components which allows information to flow directly from the encoder to the decoder. Since there are shared weights between the encoder and decoder this causes fewer parameters which reduces the chance of overfitting. U-Nets also make sure the feature maps of the encoder and decoder are the same size. U-Nets are better at dealing with imbalanced datasets as the loss function concentrates on the boundary regions between the classes, which improves the segmentation of smaller classes. This could be useful in concrete crack detection by triaging the severity and possibly automating a schedule of tasks.

Even with the improvements of skipped connections to incorporate local and global information, there are still irreversible losses of information when max pooling is used after each layer. On the other hand, without pooling layers, there is a risk of overfitting, especially when dealing with limited training data. To try and reorient the problem a new pooling operation is tried, wavelet U-Net (WUNet). The WUNet uses a wavelet transform for the downsampling and upsampling. The encoder uses discrete wavelet transformation (DWT) which will replace the pooling operation. This will preserve the features’ frequency and location, which increases texture information. Inverse wavelet transform (IWT) is used to restore resolution within the decoder. Since there is invertibility between DWT and IWT no information is lost. This is an asset when determining the differences between small nuances in pixels where no information has been lost.
